+++
title = "Why REAM"
weight = 1
+++

REAM is a data serialization standard designed for social science datasets.
The language encourages inline documentation for individual data points, and compiles to analysis-ready format (CSV, JSON, etc.) and human-readable documentation (HTML, PDF, etc.)
It also introduces features to make managing large data project easier, such as static type checking, reference and macro.
The language, along with the toolchain built upon it, aims to make it easy to create, maintain, distribute and reuse datasets.

## Easy to learn and use

REAM syntax is similar to Markdown, and should be easy to learn if not already familiar:

```ream
# Country
- name: Belgium
- population: $11433256$
- euro zone: `TRUE`
```

It takes around 15 minutes to learn the basics of the language to start writing your first REAM dataset.
Learn more advanced features later as your project scales up.

All REAM datasets are stored as text files, and can be edited in any text editor.
A [web-based editor](https://chmlee.github.io/ream-editor) is available to provide basic functionalities.
No local installation required; just visit the website, drag and drop your REAM datasets, and start getting productive.
Advanced functionalities are available through the [REAM CLI tool](https://github.com/chmlee/ream-core).
No complex development environment to set up.
No third-party dependencies to manage except Git.
Just one executable binary file.

## Static typing

REAM checks for data types during compile time to ensure type safety.
Instead of guessing what the types each variable would be assigned to when reading the following CSV:
```csvv
x1,x2,x3,x4
1.0,"1.0",true,"true"
```

you specify the types through explicit type annotation:
```ream
# Data
- x1 (num): $1.0$
- x2 (str): 1.0
- x3 (bool): `TRUE`
- x4 (str): true
```

## Single source of truth

REAM makes large data project maintainable by [reducing repetition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself) through the following ways:

### Nested structure

REAM encourages data to be stored in nested structures.
Instead of organizing data in the following 2-dimension spreadsheet:

```csvv
Country,Year
Belgium,2010
Belgium,2011
Belgium,2012
```
you write:
```ream
# Country
- name: Belgium

## Year
- name: 2010

## Year
- name: 2011

## Year
- name: 2012
```
and let the compiler compiles the latter to the former.
There is now one source for the country name `Belgium`.

### Reference*

REAM implement a reference system to reuse existing data.
Instead of manually define unique id for each data point:

```ream
# Country
- name: Belgium

## Year
- name: 2010
- unique_id: Belgium_2010

## Year
- name: 2011
- unique_id: Belgium_2011

## Year
- name: 2012
- unique_id: Belgium_2012
```

you write:
```ream
# Country
- name (str): Belgium

## Year
- name (str): 2010
- unique_id (fmt): Country$name + "_" + Year$name

## Year
- name (str): 2011
- unique_id (fmt): Country$name + "_" + Year$name

## Year
- name (str): 2012
- unique_id (fmt): Country$name + "_" + Year$name
```

Variable `unique_id` is now generated by referencing a local variable `Country$name` and the parent variable `Country$name`.

### Inline documentation

REAM encourages inline documentation for individual data points through annotations.
Instead of editing data in a spreadsheet and its documentation in a separate text file, you write:

```ream
# Country
- name: Belgium
  > officially the Kingdom of Belgium
- population: $11433256$
  > data from 2019; retrieved from World Bank
- euro zone: `TRUE`
  > joined in 1999
```
and let the compiler produce analysis-ready datasets (CSV, JSON, etc.) and human-readable documentations (HTML, PDF, etc.)
Two formats, one source.
